Plasma Youth Sports Games
with Unsuccess of the champion,
would like to thank Slaven Bilić
for stepping in as the host.
Bilić is one of the first sponsors,
ambassador and is our biggest promoter.
He used his life and sports experience
in order to prepare high-quality content
with his guests for all generations.
Thanks, Nane!
Let's go to Belgrade.
There are several reasons.
The first is that the show is excellent.
The show is beneficial for children.
All of this was initiated by Zdrave.
It's part of the Youth Sports Games.
The show is great for children.
As a form of literature.
It’s good for the fans.
It’s good for athletes.
It's also useful for me as a coach.
It's good for children and parents
so that they can see what a top player
or official has to go through
in their development.
And that there are rare cases where
everything goes according to plan.
Painlessly, without difficulty
and problems.
We can only confirm that the old
Latin proverb per aspera ad astra
(through hardship to the stars) isn't
just a myth or a legend but the truth.
In principle, the rule applies that
the more successful a person is,
the more defeats they have.
Difficulties aren't pleasant, but they're
the ones that, if you get out of them,
that forge greats and champions.
All of them.
Zdrave is great friend of mine and he
asked me to do few shows which
he calls specials and it was
hard for me to refuse him.
The third reason is that I have time.
The fourth reason is that
this is important to me,
and it is a big challenge as well.
I don't know how I'm going to do this.
On the other hand, there will be sporting
greats, so it's a great pleasure
and opportunity for me to talk
to them and ask them some things,
to engage them so that they speak.
Željko Obradović is special.
He's from my industry.
He's a player who became a coach.
What he has achieved, no one
else has when it comes to
ball sports at a top level.
And I don't believe that anyone
else will be able to repeat it.
He quickly reached the top.
And remained on it
for an incredibly long time.
That is what makes him special.
There's another personal matter.
In 2014, we worked together
in the same city.
He was the coach of the Fenerbahçe,
and I was coaching Beşiktaş.
As we had mutual friends,
they tired to introduce us-
to go out for a coffee or dinner
together. Of course, I wanted that.
However, you know how it often
happens when you live in the same city:
"I'll leave it for tomorrow
because I have a match,
then for the following week,"
and so a year passes.
After that, I moved to London,
and that’s it.
That is one of those little big
things where I often wondered,
"Why did it have to be that way?
Why did I let that happen?"
I had a year.
But dear God sees everything-
now I have the opportunity
and I don’t want to miss it.
Željko, on behalf of all of us,
it is a great honor to host you.
I know you have many obligations,
you're always short on time,
you have preseason matches and
the problems that come with them.
Therefore, on behalf of the
entire team, I thank you.
First, I want to ask you how satisfied
you are with Partizan's perfomance-
thank God, you're doing well.
Currently, Partizan is awaiting
the outcome and this is
an important part
of the season for you.
Thank you and I'm glad to have
the opportunity to talk to you.
Because you come from my
industry and we're both coaches.
You are someone who understands me.
This moment is important to us.
I tried to explain to the players that
every next game is like a final.
The only way to continue
competing in the Euroleague
and the ABA League
is precisely that-
to approach every
game like a final.
In a way, there's a lot of pressure,
and on the other hand,
I'm pleased because
I'm doing what I do best.
You're right. You know what ...
While preparing for this interview
I noticed that it would be both easy
and difficult for me at the same time.
Easy because you often appear
with journalists, you're open
and ready for conversation.
You often appear in the studios,
podcasts, seminars, various series.
There's a lot of material about
you with excellent topics,
questions, and exhaustive answers-
and it's all excellent.
On the other hand, everything
has already been said and it's
very difficult to find something
that we don't already know about you-
and I would like to ask you just that.
Because it's an exception
that's very interesting to me.
Often the best coaches are geniuses
of tactics or discipline fanatics.
Often they're closed,
they don't give much away
or they're so introverted or in that way
they maintain some charisma
through their mystique,
through a sense of untouchability.
On the other hand, you're open-
you allow people
to watch training sessions.
You are a guest at seminars
and on podcasts.
How do you explain that?
The simplest answer is that
I don't know how to be someone else.
I’m who I am.
I behave like a coach.
I want to go back to the fact
that this is 2025, and that the flow
of information is such that it's
simply impossible to hide something.
And that's why I'm open
and ready to share with all those
who think that I can
help by sharing knowledge.
I don't know how much of it is possible
or how much it's interesting to people.
But everything I know,
I want to share, and many people
come to my training sessions.
And I think it's up to them to decide
how they'll apply the things they like.
Just as I once watched others,
worked with the late professor,
or with Dušan Ivković.
I took their experiences and applied
them when working with players.
Which is good, as you yourself know,
because you're also a successful coach.
This conversation that I'm having
with you is unique because
for the first time, I'm talking
to someone who I’m sure
understands exactly who I am.
And that is-I'm a coach, just like you.
-Bravo. Do you consider...
You're a little older
than me, but not much.
I don't think there's a big age
difference between us.
And today, more things happen
in one year than before in eight.
I don't want to talk about politics,
but the system of civic sports education
in the former Yugoslavia
was exceptional.
Somehow, we were all,
as we in Dalmatia often say,
more or less the same.
We all had the same sneakers.
We had the same dinner.
Did growing up like that help you
as a player and later as a coach?
When camaraderie reigned?
-Certainly, it did.
If we go back to those times
when we lived together...
Anyone who tried to stand out
in some way,
perhaps by having better sneakers
or a T-shirt, would be ridiculed.
At that moment, it was normal
for us all to be the same.
We were a team,
we encouraged each other.
Individuality is important,
but when you grow up
in such an environment...
What mattered most during that time
was that we had parents, school,
and real teachers and professors
who taught us about life-
not just about studying
and finishing school.
But we also had a different kind
of education-life on the street.
I don't mean the kind of street life
that would lead us to ruin.
The street helped shape us
into better people.
It taught us to respect others
and to recognize those
who weren’t genuine.
That is how we became
good people,
and we learned to appreciate
true values.
I believe that today’s generations
also have the opportunity
to connect with those same values.
Today, in the 21st century,
as humanity continues to evolve,
some values have
always remained important.
I hope that will remain true.
At that time, the conditions weren't
the easiest, but they were ideal.
You say that the best gift
you ever received was a bicycle,
and that's because
the training center was far away.
You needed the help
getting to the practice.
And then you also say
there was only one field
to play basketball in
with only one or two balls.
If you lose the game, you must wait
two hours for the next one.
All of those conditions made you
stronger. Nothing was easy.
Giving up was the easiest thing,
but all those conditions
pushed you to overcome
all the hurdles.
That's how champions are made,
that's how special people are made.
Nothing is better
than the feeling of pride
after you overcome all of that
because you know it wasn't easy.
You had to fight. Life is a battle.
You always have to fight
for anything in life,
and that concept is
very emphasized in sports.
Exactly that... I remember
that first gift, the second one,
and the first balls I got. Sometimes,
the most important thing for us
was to have two balls
during a game of basketball.
God forbid something happens
to one ball we played with,
and we didn't have
the second one around...
But that did happen a few times, and
we just played with some other props.
I remember back in our apartment,
well actually, in our house,
we had a curtain rod
and a ping-pong ball attached to it.
I would spend all-day
trying to do hoops with that.
I did that with my best man,
who grew up in Čačak.
I am immensely proud of
those kinds of friendships.
We would do that all day and
act like that was a basketball game.
I was so happy
when I asked my late father
to make a basketball hoop on a pole
in the street next to my house,
so that we could play there.
There was no end to that happiness.
Having the hoop there meant that
whenever I had some free time,
I could just go out and play in the
street. That kind of happiness...
I don't know how to explain that.
There is nothing to compare
that kind of satisfaction to.
Do you remember the transfer from the
junior team in Borac to your first team?
Maybe not your first,
but one of the first games,
the first time
going into the locker room...
It wasn't easy to get in back then
because Borac was a good club.
You had to stay with them
until you turned 28 years old.
From what I remember and from what
I read, you asked professor Nikolić
if you could go on a loan. He didn't
allow it and told you to stay
and play here. Do you remember
those beginnings in the first team?
Was it difficult?
Was that a dream come true?
Were you proud?
How did you feel back then?
I grew up in an environment with Kićo,
Radmilo, Vlade, Arsić, and Drobnjak,
not to mention everybody,
all the good players now...
I came into the team as a junior and
was the country's champion at the time.
The only title Borac had from Čačak
was from my generation,
where I was the captain, the best
player, the best shooting guard.
Then, in the year 1978.,
an incredible thing happened.
Professor Nikolić, a champion of
Yugoslavia from the club Manila,
came to Borac as an advisor.
He was the man who came every week,
held training sessions, and so on...
I started working with him and realized
that what I thought was basketball,
as a playmaker and shooting guard,
had nothing to do with
basketball as he perceived it.
I fell under his strong influence
and started changing as a player.
I started playing as a playmaker,
and I still carry what he taught me.
But exactly that... You prepared
for this talk very well!
That was the year I wanted to play,
and I think for a young player,
the most important thing is to have
the opportunity to play somewhere.
True. -I didn't want to sit on the bench
because there were so many good players
in front of me on the court. I told the
professor, or maybe it was him who said
that he heard I wanted to go to Radnički
Kragujevac. I told him that was true,
because I wanted to play, and he told me
I would get a chance to play here, too.
I asked him if that was something
he could guarantee or promise,
and he said it was. Of course,
I trusted someone like my professor
and my late coach, Slobodan Conja
Koprivica. So, I stayed in that club.
One of the decisive moments
in my career as a player
was when Borac dropped out of
the first league the following year.
A new generation
of players stepped in
as the older ones went to serve
in the military or went to other clubs.
The young players
were given a chance to play,
and I was given the opportunity to play.
That's when doors started opening.
Things have to happen...
-That was pure luck.
Sadly, my club dropped out of
the old Yugoslavian league,
where we were previously taking fifth
place. We even played the Korać Cup.
But that season, due to
traveling and everything else,
led to us dropping out of the league,
older players leaving,
and younger players
getting to step in.
From that moment on, my career
as a player started taking off.
Everybody has that one moment.
It's luck and openness to new things,
but only big people and big players
seize that opportunity.
That's exactly it.
That's that difference.
Okay, so you were playing for Partizan,
you were on the national team,
everything was going like clockwork,
as we say in Dalmatia.
When you turned 30, you did something
that, from today's perspective,
is the best thing you could have done
for your career.
But you know, my whole life,
well 40 years of it,
I've dedicated to football and sport...
Kroos left Real Madrid at 34 last year,
but a player, especially a good one like
you at the time, wants to keep playing.
You were still waiting to play in the
European championship and win medals.
How did you make the decision to leave?
Who did you consult with? How?
I talked with myself. At the time
I was the captain of the national team,
and we knew we would
win gold most likely,
and that I was supposed to be the one to
raise the cup... Something in me was...
Kićo called me during the night
while we were returning from Poreč
and national team training.
My late best man Sava and I
went to see him and he told us that
I had to take on the team now
or they would get another trainer.
At that moment, I made the decision.
How do I explain that to you, Slaven?
At that moment, nobody
believed it but Kićo and Sava.
Not even my best friends believed me.
Everybody told me I was insane.
That was the first time in my career
that I was close to some very serious
contracts with one club from
Yugoslavia and Germany.
We were talking about a lot of money
there. For the first time in my life...
You never played abroad. -Yes.
You were a fantastic player. You were
a playmaker, you were important...
But I knew that what was being offered
was something I wanted to do.
But that position would wait for you.
-Yes, it would.
Rađa wasn't the only one to say...
-But Kićo didn't want to wait for me.
Everybody was saying that you're
the one for the job. You said yourself
five minutes ago that you were the one
writing down the training schedules.
Yes. -You knew it was coming your way.
Maybe not in Partizan, though.
As the saying says, opportunities are
there for those who seize them-true.
But you knew that was certain,
that it was coming your way.
I always said that
once you make a decision,
you accept it and live with it.
You don't go back in time and think
if other options would have been better.
You make a decision, and you live with
it. I made my decision then with Sava.
They didn't want to wait for the
European championship to end,
so I put my foot down. Of course, at
that moment, it all seemed unbelievable.
Afterwards they... We started making
a team and working with it.
Whenever we played matches,
we would be losing by 50 points.
Naturally, people began laughing at
Partizan's choice to sign these players.
A lot of these young players
from numerous national, junior,
and senior teams, like Saša Danilović,
Đorđević, Rebrača, Šilobad, Lončar,
Nakić also joined from another team,
Vlado Dragutinović
and Koprivica from IMT,
Stevanović from Radnički,
and made them into a team.
The only experienced player we had
was the late Dragiša Šarić.
We first started with the preparations
and then with the tournaments.
Of course, after that,
everything started looking better.
We started winning, and people were
curious to see what was going on there.
I became a person that doesn't
sleep for two months.
Every exercise I gave out
was thought through
so I could have all the answers for
the players. I always had the answers.
I was lucky that they put their trust
in me because I was their captain.
As for my humanity
and character traits,
they had no issue with that,
but their concern was,
"Let's see if this coach
actually knows what he's doing."
And I was showing them that I do.
I was fortunate to have
the late professor by my side.
He was teaching me things,
and I was just absorbing them all.
I spent two years in Partizan.
After the first fantastic year,
I didn't go chasing after the money
and work abroad.
I stayed alongside the professor for
free in Partizan for a whole year.
There wasn't any money,
and the situation was challenging.
Still, I loved doing that,
so I stayed there to better myself.
When I look back at those times, I
congratulate myself for doing just that.
Phenomenal. You said that you
received the best compliment
from Duda Jurković,
who you are connected to.
He said he had never seen a coach or
a man with such great intuition as you.
Yes. -Do you rely on your intuition
when making substitutes
and for more significant decisions like
a career break or choosing a new club?
Intuition is more connected to
these situations regarding matches
and times when you have to react fast,
usually during the game
or during summer when you are choosing
between several good players.
Everybody knows who a good player is,
but you always want to find out
more information like
what kind of a person they are,
if he will change the team atmosphere,
if he will fit in...
But intuition is needed during training
and games when deciding on substitutes,
defense, attacks... As I already said,
you make decisions and live with them.
I don't know a single person
that always makes the right decisions.
I think a person like that
doesn't exist. -You. -No, no way.
A person like that doesn't exist.
-You are close...
You make decisions
and live with them.
Going back in time and thinking
what you could have done differently
is a waste of time.
You make decisions, live with them,
and tell yourself it is
the best possible decision.
Decisions have to be made, though.
-They have to be made.
Yes, they have to be made.
-That's the essence.
I am lucky to have some people
around me who I respect and love
and whose opinions
I care about a lot.
But I was always the one who made
the decision in the end. -Yes.
That is my decision. It concerns
my life, my team, my family...
I want to be the one
making the decisions.
But of course, I will listen
to the people I trust
and who are always there for me.
Sometimes, you win, and it feels good.
If I open my phone after a win,
I know I will see 200 messages.
But when we lose, I know
there will be those five...
Those five people... -That’s
the first ring that protects you.
Those are your people,
and they are always the best.
Okay. Let’s talk about that a bit.
When you're unemployed,
you choose a club.
Now you're picking players.
Of course, there are scouts.
-Yes. -I read that, it's detailed,
you get reports. In the end, you know
what kind of player someone is.
The basketball world is also small.
Even from coaches, teammates,
and barbers, informations are gathered.
When selecting, if you
have to separate something,
do you go by character or quality?
Would you take...
Someone who scores 15-20 points,
but isn't the best in the locker room.
Or the opposite?
If you can't find the ideal one,
because the ideal won't come to Partizan,
but wants to stay at Real. -That’s right.
How do you react?
Where do you draw the line?
It's not easy,
but it's a very good question.
Recognizing a good player,
everyone can do that easily.
When he's good, it's easy.
But these other things matter.
I've always said that the most important
thing is that he's a good player.
When we have three point guards,
and we also have this fourth one...
Let him come too. When someone is good,
they will give you something good.
But when someone is bad,
they can't give you anything.
That's the first thing.
You recognize a good player.
When building a team,
you create a composition.
There's a way to build
a basketball team,
by positions, and you look
at what you need.
And during the season,
when injuries happen,
when you have a problem... Your
number 5, your big man, gets injured.
But there are no good
number fives on the market.
We don’t have to take
a number five,
let’s get a player that everyone
on the team will say is good.
Not just take some average player
and say, "He won’t help us."
Quality comes first, always.
-Absolutely. -But as a coach,
you also have to convince someone.
"You're prone to these things.
Can you change a little?"
You have to understand team chemistry.
The team is always the most important.
I will always defend the team.
Coaches defend the team.
-And themselves. -That’s just how it is.
There’s no ideal.
I always use that phrase.
We can't buy 12 Michael Jordans.
-Yes. -Or 12 Toni Kukočs.
12 Paspaljs, Divacs, I don’t know.
That’s not possible.
Someone has to play a secondary role.
When they asked me...
I’m grateful that I had the chance
to coach the best players.
When they ask me about the best,
everyone knows who they are.
But I remember those who helped
me and my team become champions,
and many don’t know about them.
The ones in secondary roles.
They will do everything for the team
so that we can be at the top.
I always remember those players.
The ones who are the best...
Recently, there was a list of the
25 best Euroleague players,
I've coached 15 of them.
Everyone knows who they are.
Not just me, others coached
them too, of course.
But without those who do,
it's an ugly word, the dirty work,
who do the other things... -The miners.
-The miners, exactly. Thank you.
Without them,
there’s no success.
We talked over lunch
about the Premier League.
You often have a dilemma.
I can't buy a winger
who scores goals, assists,
and helps the full-back.
That player goes to City, Arsenal.
At West Ham, you have that dilemma.
There’s another dilemma. I have
to take a player who proved himself
at a lower level, in Switzerland,
Belgium, Croatia, Serbia, etc.
I hope he will be able to...
-It implies better motivation.
And quality. Or someone who
succeeded in the Premier League,
but in the last two years declined,
either due to injury or poor form,
and now I hope that my staff and I
can bring him back to that level.
It's not ideal. -Slaven, I told you
over the lunch, you worked in a league
that’s like the NBA. The English
league in football is incredible.
There’s no one who loves football
who doesn’t watch the English league.
Full respect to the Spanish, Germans,
Italians, but the English are the English.
It’s unreal. The organization, the players.
When you look at how it all works...
I told you, my dream is to watch
the FA Cup final live. -We'll go.
Or the NCAA final in America.
I know what you mean.
We talked about how you
reached that level...
Working in the English league
is incredible.
It’s the NBA of Europe.
Now you have your team,
your staff.
Explain a bit, for young coaches,
how do you choose your staff.
Just like with players, quality
and character. It’s the same with staff.
Their ability, and on
the other side, loyalty. -Yes.
Of course, both are important.
-In my coaching staff,
I have three people who were
with me for seven years at Fenerbahçe.
Vlade Andrović, Bata Zimonjić,
the conditioning coach,
and Scierdo, I worked with him
at Joventut in 1993. Now it’s 2025.
We stayed in touch. I called him.
Now I’ll give an example, Bogdan Karaičić.
He worked with the national team
under Igor Kokoškov.
Igor recommended him. I told him
to call him in for an interview.
We talked for five minutes.
Five minutes.
I asked a few questions
and said, "OK."
You’ll be on my coaching staff.
About a month passed,
while they were with the national team.
Igor calls me and asks what’s going on,
the kid is asking. I told him it’s fine.
There’s nothing more to discuss.
Five minutes with someone
is enough for me to see
how much they know and can do.
That’s knowledge.
The other thing is loyalty.
I build relationships where
I am equal with them.
They have the right to say
whatever they want,
during a game or in training.
I take in all that information,
but in the end, I make
the decision. That’s it.
Wherever I worked,
I was lucky...
From Partizan, Joventut, Real,
Benetton, Panathinaikos,
Fenerbahçe, and here,
I worked with amazing people.
Now I joke with Neven Spahija,
who is coaching in Venice.
Two assistants who were with me
in Treviso are now his assistants.
I worked with them in 1997.
So I send him messages:
"It’s easy for you when you work
with them." We’re good friends.
They are all wonderful people,
amazing coaches.
I always wondered
if I was that lucky.
I chose my assistants.
There used to be just one assistant.
Now it’s an entire coaching staff.
When I left Joventut,
the one who is now my assistant,
the coach sitting next to me...
I found him there.
A great person, we became friends.
He’s like a brother to me.
And Vlade, no need to even mention him.
We grew up together, played in Čačak.
Bata as well. The two in Treviso,
wonderful people. I found them there too.
I didn’t choose them.
I was told they were there.
Is that luck? Maybe it is,
or maybe it’s my way of working.
To give them confidence.
I’m not someone you just nod to.
The moment you do that, it’s over.
Tell me if you disagree.
He’s an assistant coach,
and he’s a friend.
Are you a control freak,
do you need to know everything,
or do you say who does what?
The contact is daily.
Do you need to know everything? -No.
I’m a philanthropist. I love people.
I trust people. If that’s the case,
I trust them too.
Trust sometimes leads to disappointment.
Not only in coaching, but in life.
I can’t change myself
after hitting the wall three times.
I can’t. I keep loving
people and I’ll keep loving.
That experience sometimes helps
to slow down.
Or it gives you the situation
to find a reason to talk.
I trusted you,
and this is how you repay me.
Let’s see if you’re wrong
or if I’m wrong.
Conversation is the most important
for people to understand each other.
I’m going back to what
we were talking about.
Saying "sorry" when you make
a mistake is so easy,
but people don’t use it that often.
-Well done.
I had lunch yesterday
with Nemanja Vidić, a legend.
He says it’s all about professionalism.
He brings in professionals.
They don’t have to be friends.
I say OK, but there has to be a balance.
When things aren’t going well,
you need someone who will hug you
and comfort you,
or you do that for them.
There needs to be some balance.
-When the Euroleague game ends,
I’m the last one to leave
the office. Always.
There are a thousand reasons
why I talk to everyone,
and I also have a press conference.
It has never happened that we
lost an important game,
and didn’t stay together.
Coaches. We stay and talk.
Those are the moments when
they know they need to be with me,
that I’m struggling.
I know it’s hard for them too.
Then we help each other.
Without that, it’s impossible.
I don’t believe
in harsh professionalism.
I love Vidić. He had
a fantastic career.
He probably has experience, some
reasons, but I don’t believe in that.
We are humans first and foremost,
much more than professionals.
That trust between us is
a prerequisite for team chemistry
and for all of us to function. I often
get angry at the assistant coaches
and the players during the game.
That’s the moment.
They know it. After that,
it’s over. -Well done.
If I repeat something to you 20 times,
and you make a mistake on the 21st time,
I have to react.
And they do the same to me.
Feel free to say that I made
a mistake. Of course, I did.
Of course, you’re right.
What’s the problem?
Who is the person who
doesn’t make mistakes?
Is there such a person? I don’t know him.
Exactly. Well done. You’re...
Many coaches, especially
the younger ones, in any sport,
say "I play like this, and that’s it."
Bring me the players.
The club can’t change 7-8 players
just to please you.
On the other hand,
you succeeded in that,
and the current lineup of Partizan
is an example of that.
This is a new team, right? -Yes.
But, Real with Sabonis,
won the championship.
After he left, even though
you are European champions,
you change 10 players.
-That's right.
With Sabonis, you score 80,
and with the new team,
you score 100 points. -Yes.
-So, your greatness is reflected in that.
The model is built
around the players.
We all have our own principles
and the way we like to play.
In basketball, it’s this:
"We play good defense,
we run on the fast break,
we score easily,
we want the audience
to be satisfied, etc."
Everything in that story is fine,
but only when you step onto the court
you can see the quality
of the people you’ve chosen.
And yes, after that in Real,
I was asked why I’m changing the team
that’s European champion.
I said: "Wait, people, the one
who was the most important has left."
Everything revolved around him.
He was the player
who loved to steal the ball,
make the first pass to those
who are running,
because he hated going first
into the offense.
When he runs into offense…
I remember one game against Zaragoza,
which I always talk about.
He had 45 points and 28 rebounds
in a 45-minute basketball game.
What more is there to say?
I had a problem with him
during training,
with the double teams
we were practicing.
I had never seen anything
like it in my life.
Before the double team, it was like
he was playing volleyball,
when the ball came to him,
he’d do this, as if he was slapping it.
He could exactly, the moment
the ball was coming to him,
see who was free.
I asked him to do something similar
during a game.
You catch the ball, then wait for them
to double-team you.
He asked: "Why, coach,
when I can see everything?"
What could I tell him?
-Yeah, what?
That year with him was incredible.
If he hadn’t had that ankle injury,
he would have dominated in the NBA too,
but he would have been a wonder
with 2,20, quick thinking,
and that easy touch.
Because he shot
three-pointers phenomenally.
He was 2 meters and 20 tall.
If he could have run a little faster,
nobody would have been better than him.
We changed the team,
and for his position, a man came in,
who is now the sports director
of Partizan, Zoran Savić and Jan Lukas.
And for me, during those years in Spain,
they said I played control basketball.
Then I brought in Zoran,
who was a center and could run,
so, as you said, we scored
around 100 points in 8 games.
Then comes the question,
"What do you say now?"
I don’t know how no one understands
that everything depends on
who you have in the team.
That’s it.
In the end, all basketball coaches
will tell you,
"The offense is fantastic,
but nobody gave their maximum
if they didn’t play defense." -True.
You’ll probably say
the same about football.
You can have Ronaldo and Messi
and you’ll score one more goal,
but if you concede easily,
you won’t win easily.
Wait, if you play badly in training,
and nothing is ever really bad,
and you play 5 on 5 on a smaller court,
5 defenders against 5 attackers,
the defenders will always win.
-Yes. -No matter the position,
you can never score as many goals
as you can concede. -Yes.
These defenses are something.
Okay, but regardless
of whether you're playing for fewer
or more points,
the denominator is the same.
Every one of your teams
"sacrifices" itself. (plays selflessly)
And your statement is,
"All I ask from you
is to give your best."
Yes, because without that,
it’s impossible. Motivation is key.
There is also the fact
that it's a large number of games
and not every game can be played
with the same level of motivation.
That’s what I try to awaken in them,
and when it’s a 50/50 ball, let it be ours.
If the ball is here, dive for it.
The crowd will reward you.
After that, you can miss and lose,
and they will still be with you,
because they see
your desire and fight.
So that’s the first prerequisite,
but it must be repeated.
You can’t say it once or twice.
It must be said before every game.
We are lucky to be "Partizan"
and wherever we play,
there are our people.
But that’s not important.
Wherever you play,
the first and most basic thing
is to fight for the ball,
because in that way, you show
that you have the desire to win,
and if you show desire, it means
that your motivation is
at the highest possible level.
A motivated person has no limits.
You’re saying that, yes.
Whoever lacks motivation
can’t expect,
not just in sports, in basketball,
but in anything they do in life,
to reach the heights
they once hoped to achieve.
Everyone knows that, but only you
manage to achieve it.
I don’t always succeed.
Now, the season begins...
You have fifteen players? -Yes.
When I was preparing
to become a coach,
I went to see Wenger,
who is the coach of Arsenal.
I am a young coach. -Yes.
When I arrived, he told me,
"This is just like being
a manager of a bank.
You’re the director of the bank."
You have 25 young managers,
who have money, are good-looking,
have cars, go out, but for the project,
you need 11 of them.
You also know that for the next project,
you'll need 4-5 new ones, or more.
Maybe all 11. -Exactly.
How do you motivate
these marginal ones?
Because a player feels what his role
is after the preparations. -Yes.
It roughly crystallizes, doesn’t it?
Maybe less in basketball,
more in football,
because the score is higher?
How do you maintain motivation
in those players,
to play when they get the chance,
and they will get it?
This is achieved through
daily conversations,
after which all players must
feel that they are important.
And that’s exactly
what I try to explain.
And of course, it's an old story that
we have 15 players on the list,
because practically every week
two or three are out of the game
due to injuries, illness,
or something else.
And of course, all of them,
when the season starts, want to play.
As time goes on and as motivation
in some games naturally decreases,
they start thinking about
how they could skip this one...
And when one skips,
the other has to step in.
And that’s it. Use your chance,
and when you use it,
maybe the one who left, won’t be
in the starting five anymore,
but it will be you.
That depends on you. I always say,
"The playing time on the court
doesn’t depend on me,
it depends on them.
They decide for themselves.
Not me, or the audience."
I'm not naive either,
to remove from the game
someone who is playing well.
I understand, but we just said
that players are selfish.
Of course, they are.
Once, Capello told me...
He was the coach of Russia,
and I was the coach of Lokomotiv.
He gave me one piece of advice,
"Never promise a player anything."
But when you're buying a player,
when you invite him to the team,
you have to attract him
with something, right?
Yes, yes. You have to tell him
what exactly you expect from him.
You have to, as we say,
give him a little candy. -Exactly.
And how do you motivate
these top players
to do the boring things in training?
5 on 0, defense, things that players
understand very quickly
and think they don’t need
to repeat 100 times.
That is a problem,
because those who are the best,
are the best because they
understand right away and apply it.
Then you explain to them
that some things are repeated,
not for them but for the others.
But then, for the best ones,
you create a little trick.
You tell them,
"Run the Five Down."
When they start to do it, they realize
that such an offense doesn’t exist.
Then I tell them, "Where are
you going, stop for a moment?"
It’s a trick, but you have to
show them something too.
Even the most focused players
make mistakes, and that’s the essence.
The late Profa, as well as
all the best coaches,
always said, and I’ll tell that
young coaches too,
"Automatisms, when you have
an automaton, then that’s it."
When we talk about offenses,
there are many in basketball.
5 on 5 on half the court, screens, etc...
My former player and great friend,
currently an outstanding coach,
Šarūnas Jasikevičius,
when we met before the game
against them here, he told me,
"Željko, what’s this?
My assistants told me you stopped
running some offenses
and now you’re playing simple things."
Yes, I play simple things,
because I have players who can do that.
Yes. -And the whole essence
is in that. Let’s simplify it,
so that even those who don’t quite
understand can get it.
That way, it will be easier for everyone.
Let’s simplify everything,
so that everyone can do everything.
And when the situation comes,
when we need something
a little more complicated,
then we’ll choose these 5 or 7
who are capable of doing it.
If, in that case, I put
someone else on the court,
I can’t blame him,
because it’s entirely my mistake
that he’s on the court at that moment.
I know that when I talk to myself.
And I don’t get angry at that player,
because he’s not at that level
to be able to respond to that.
When we were champions in 2017,
with Fenerbahçe I had a player,
Ekpe Udoh, who was
the laziest at practice.
Nobody liked him, not his teammates,
not the coaching staff, nobody.
I had a conversation with him
and told him,
"You’re bothering everyone, but I know
what you can give me in the game."
He turned into a beast
during the game.
He had incredible concentration.
It was enough to tell him,
"In defense, we play this,"
or "In offense, we play that." A miracle.
But at practice, he was lazy, lazy.
When the ball is loose and we’re
playing 5 on 5, he’s a different person.
Use that trait of his,
if it will lead you to your goal.
I didn’t want to send him away.
And Darryl Middleton,
at 40 years old,
when I give them 3 on 0 fast break drills,
he was the first to dunk the ball.
I always put him in the top three.
Then I tell them, "Wait a minute,
you’re 18 years old, you’re 19,
and this man is 40 and still the first
to dunk, the first to sprint,
and you can’t."
Diversity is a miracle. -100%.
But this is your position, right?
Players want to come to you,
they want trophies,
they want to progress,
they want to feel what it is?
Because you’ve launched yourself
to the very top and you’re protected.
You’ve earned all of that,
but you’re protected.
Nothing can touch you,
up to a certain limit, of course,
not the player, not the agent,
not the president,
and not even the media will dare.
Fans, of course, love blood,
tears, and sweat. -Yes.
Try to put yourself in the position
of a new coach,
like Mourinho at Manchester United.
The guy came from Sporting,
where he defeated Benfica and Porto,
in three years, two titles. That’s top.
He came there, things went badly,
and he said,
"We are the worst
Manchester in history."
That’s a massacre, you threw
the players under the bus,
what kind of psychology is that?
Can a coach today
rule sovereignly, like you?
I'll explain one thing.
In the last three years
players haven’t been coming
because of me,
but because of Partizan.
I always tell them to pay attention
to what kind of club they’re coming to.
I know who I am.
When I talk to them, I am direct.
I don't promise what I can't fulfill.
That's for sure.
I tell them to watch Partizan
games and that atmosphere.
Every player, during these four years,
as long as I've been in Partizan,
is overjoyed to be playing
in Partizan,
because we are the most
watched club in the world.
Indeed, I think Parizan is specific.
It was there before,
but it didn't have such players.
We love black and whites and all that...
-Yes, but those were different times,
it was the time of the pandemic.
Partizan didn't participate
in the Euroleague.
Now that's changed. When Dule was
a coach and many coaches before him...
There were some strange
matches in the Euroleague.
Partizan fans are known for that.
It's not just my merit.
Partizan fans also deserve it.
But in answer to your question
I never thought
that I am someone who is
irreplaceable and untouchable.
I didn't even think of doing
something else than what I do.
I am a coach,
in a club called now Partizan,
and before that he was Fenerbahce,
then it was Panathinaikos.
There are people
who have their own functions.
It is known what the president
of the club does.
The sports sector knows
what is being done.
In the club management,
they also know what they are doing.
It is known what the spokesman does,
he is in charge for public relations.
I'm a coach. Of course,
experience that I have,
will help all those people, if they
want. I always am ready to talk.
I helped people who they are very
serious in their professions.
Like the Giannakopoulos brothers
who did miracles with Panathinaikos.
They are older than me.
They considered me a son
and a member of the family.
But they trusted me and asked to show,
explain what to do and make it work,
but even then I wasn’t explicit
that it had to be that way.
A coach must be dedicated
to his work.
He can not interfere
in other matters.
The coach shouldn’t be interested
whether he is attacked by journalists.
Are they against him,
whatever the reason.
Are it against him because of the fans?
Or because opposing club?
Are they enviable, because we live
in the time in which jealousy reigns.
I know all that and
I don't deal with it.
I deal with myself,
my staff and players.
And, of course,
fans are important to me,
but without flattering them.
Fans who support us
have the right to criticize.
To say anything they
think is not good.
That motivates us. But that's where
everything begins and ends.
The limit of the coaching job
is not exceeded. -Bravo!
Now we come to your relationship
with the players.
What kind of relationship is that?
It is very wide and well known.
You said your phone
always available.
And from managers, directors,
but, primarily, your phone.
I know coaches from the Premier
League. I won't say their names.
To maintain their authority,
they show up for training on Friday,
and the game is on Saturday.
Or they watch pracitce
from the sidelines.
I know coaches who say they
won the Premier League trophy.
They told their players they can
knock twice a year in a season.
Never on match day or before a match,
only twice a season.
No more. And on the other hand,
you and I give everything we have.
Contact with the players
is very important.
As is individual and team conversation.
I have never allowed myself to talk
to a player about another player.
That is also a rule of life.
-Only in his presence.
That is right. The most important
thing is to be honest.
I have always been that.
I always say what I think.
Sometimes someone
doesn't like it, but that is life.
We have to be aware that everyone
has the right to say what they think.
I'm like that with players.
During the year, depending
on the situation and the season,
if you talked to someone
at the beginning of the season,
you have to remind them for that
conversation after a month,
two or three days.
Someone you had a problem
with at the beginning,
you realize that you influenced
him to change in a positive way.
You are proud of that.
It was always important to me
when I end my cooperation
with the players
we still maintain an excellent contact.
In 34 or 35 years
that I have been a coach,
there is not a single player,
that I have coached,
who is not on good terms with me.
Now it was the game against Monaco.
Calathes was a child when
he came to Panathinaikos.
I told him that he would be the best
player in the Final Four in 2011.
And he almost made it.
It was Diamantidis.
And now it is 2025. Nick comes
to hug me before the game.
And Michael James,
who is the best scorer.
I never coached him,
but he respects me.
Shengelija and me, two days
before that we were together.
I took them to a match for Dražen
Petrović. I remember that...
We were playing against the Croatian
national team, and he called and said,
"We are Dražen’s team,
we must not lose."
I can’t forget that,
that was a friendly match.
He showed me character then.
I congratulated them and gathered them.
Musa and that team I led...
And we won then.
It doesn’t matter! We won, because
they said "This is Dražen’s team!"
"You know who Dražen was?"
The respect you have makes
you satisfied and happy.
When people respect you...
Of course, after a year,
or when you work with someone
for a longer period of time,
some difficult situations arise,
but we are human.
We have to tell each other
what we think.
And come out of that situation
even stronger,
because it is good
for you and for me.
But the most important is the team.
-Excellent, I agree with that.
It is known that in the past...
The coach was given authority
based on position.
You think that in these times,
I am going back to that...
I told you about this during lunch...
You and Jokić come to Barcelona now.
That is the reality.
The authority is with him.
Before, you weren't allowed
to say anything to Jokić,
because he was the boss, but
that authority has changed a bit.
Coaches are expected to have
absolute authority, but they don't.
Sport is just a reflection of life.
Not even a kindergarten
teacher has authority.
Neither a school teacher,
nor a police officer,
and even a parent has a different
kind of authority today
than in our time. -That's right.
Does this new mentality bother you?
"I don't care, we're partners."
The generation gap is something
very important.
I'm going back to where I started.
These were people
with whom it was easy.
Now I coach the sons of the players
that I used to coach.
Maybe I'll wait for a grandchild...
And continue working
a few more years?
I'm trying to get down to their level.
What young people are going
through now, I must to understand.
Of course, the life is beautiful.
When someone laughs,
the pleasure that laughter brings
to people is something important.
I know I'm strict on the court, but
I'm completely different off the court.
I try to talk to these young people
about topics
that I believe are interesting to them.
Sometimes I succeed, sometimes I don't.
You have to knock on their door
to get them to open it.
When they open their door, it's easier.
Sometimes they keep it closed.
Maybe they think the coach
has authority,
how can I deal with him? When they
see that, and some time passes...
I love those dinners and lunches,
and when one of us,
but I am always late,
then I pay for the first dinner.
We get together, we drink
and we tell human stories.
So that they can know
that I'm one of them.
That's right. We're a team,
there's no "me" and "you".
We'll always be a team. The sooner
you explain, the easier it gets.
Of course, that generation gap
exists and will always exist.
You're absolutely right,
times have changed.
We used to not have many
opportunities to choose
what we're going to do in life.
But the best players show
that even in this time.
Dedication is by far
the most important thing.
That's what makes the difference
between equals. -Exactly.
That would be all in this
special edition
"Unsuccess of the champion
with Slaven Bilić".
Watch the second part of the interview
with Željko Obradović
on Arena Sport 1,
March 3rd at 8 p.m.
When you watch those
short clips about you,
you sometimes surprise yourself.
You say. "What is this?"
"Aleksa, Aleksa!"
Do you want me to break
the board on your head?
I was trying to explain
to the players,
while I am talking to you,
you interest me.
I'm not thinking about whether
I'll be fired tomorrow.
At Partizan, of course.
I have to tell you this...
If you don't want to do coaching,
this job is going well for you.
You're an encyclopedia...
Željko, I have to say
something in the end.
You're really unique!